---
title: Project setup and best practices
description: Testing, packaging, and code quality best practices for your Python project.
---

# Best practices for your project

If you have an idea for a Qiskit-based project, you'll often want to share it
with the community. Putting your code online is a good start, but if a user
can't work out how to install or use your project, they'll give up and move on.
This page covers licensing, packaging, testing, and documenting your project,
all of which improve your users' experience. If you're releasing research code,
following best practices will also help others reproduce your results.

Once you've polished it up, consider adding your project to the [Qiskit
ecosystem](https://www.ibm.com/quantum/ecosystem).

## GitHub

Most Qiskit projects are hosted on [GitHub](https://github.com/), a source-code
hosting platform. GitHub is based on [Git](https://git-scm.com/) (a version
control system) and provides a large set of tools to help collaborate on your
project and keep it to a high quality. See [Github
skills](https://skills.github.com/) to get up to speed on GitHub quickly. The
rest of this page will assume you have your project hosted on GitHub.

Some key features are:

* **Issues and Pull requests:** Users can use issues to report bugs in your
  project or request changes to it. Your team and external contributors can use
  pull requests to propose and review changes to your project.

  If you want to accept contributions from others, make sure to add a
  [contributing
  guide](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/setting-up-your-project-for-healthy-contributions/setting-guidelines-for-repository-contributors)
  and a [code of
  conduct](https://docs.github.com/en/communities/setting-up-your-project-for-healthy-contributions/adding-a-code-of-conduct-to-your-project).

* **GitHub actions:** This feature runs scripts when certain events happen in
  your GitHub repo. For example, you can run your [test
  suite](#test-your-project) when you push new code or automatically
  [publishing your package](#publish-to-pypi) when you tag a commit.

* **Security features:** These include
  * [Dependabot](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/dependabot/dependabot-security-updates/configuring-dependabot-security-updates)
    – a tool to automatically update your dependencies.
  * [Trusted publishing to PyPI](https://docs.pypi.org/trusted-publishers/) –
    to reduce the risk of a malicious actor gaining control of your package.
  * [Branch
    protection](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/configuring-branches-and-merges-in-your-repository/managing-protected-branches/about-protected-branches)
    – to make sure code meets some criteria before being pushed to certain
    branches.

## Choose a license

If you want others to use your project, you *must* choose an appropriate
license. Otherwise, your grant no permission for others to use it. Most
projects in the [Qiskit ecosystem](https://www.ibm.com/quantum/ecosystem) use
the Apache 2.0 or MIT licenses. Visit GitHub's
[choosealicense.com](https://choosealicense.com) to decide which license is
best for you.

Add your license to the top level of your repository in a text file named
`LICENSE`. When you create a new repository, GitHub will give you the option to
automatically add a standard license.

## Dependency management

If you don't clearly specify your project's dependencies, users (including your
future self) will struggle to install and use it.

The simplest way to list your requirements is to put the Python version you're
using in your `README` and include a
[`requirements.txt`](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format/)
file in your repository. However, this means you must manually identify your
requirements and keep the file in sync.

Tools such as [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/) solve this problem by
managing dependencies for you, which means they can keep track of everything
you've installed. Installing a dependency through Poetry will add it to a
"lock" file, which keeps track of the exact versions of each package you have
installed. Users can use the lockfile to replicate your environment.

See [Poetry: Basic usage](https://python-poetry.org/docs/basic-usage/) to set
up your project with Poetry.

## Test your project

Tests are small functions you'll write to make sure your code is working
correctly. A good test suite makes working on your code easier; if the tests
pass, your code is good. This means you can be confident you haven't broken
anything when refactoring or adding new features. Seeing tests in a project's
repository gives users more confidence in the stability of the project.

The two most popular testing frameworks in Python are:
* Python's built-in [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html)
* [`pytest`](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/)

You can also consider using [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/4.18.0/) to test your
project against different versions of Python.

## Code quality tools

A linter is a tool that detects (and sometimes corrects) common problems in
your code. A popular linter for Python is
[`ruff`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/). Other popular tools include
[`mypy`](https://www.mypy-lang.org/) for type-checking, and
[`bandit`](https://bandit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) for security scanning.

Once you've set your tools up, you can use a [GitHub action](#github) to make
sure all code pushed to your repository has been linted.

## Package your project

Consider [packaging your Python
project](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/)
to make it easy for others to install and use. You should also consider
uploading your package to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) so it can be installed
through `pip`.

If your project is a transpiler plugin, see [Create a transpiler
plugin](/guides/create-transpiler-plugin) to integrate correctly with Qiskit's
transpiler. This makes it easy for users to incorporate your plugin into their
Qiskit code.
